---
layout: post
title:  "md5sums"
date:   2015-03-11
comments: true
---

It's probably fine, I used wget.

Maybe, but if the data you're working with has hundreds (or thousands) of files than it's likely one or more got mangled up in the tubes. It's also incredibly easy to check md5sums on linux, with OS X it's a little harder to do in an automated way, but not impossible.

Because I'm an incredibly efficient worker I time all my big data downloads to occur when I'm out of the office or occupied with some other project. Monday mornings suck a little less when there's fresh data on the server ready to be analyzed. Monday will suck a lot more though if your data is corrupted. But how do you know? It looks like the files all downloaded. Enter md5sum.

md5sum is a unix command (md5 on OS X and FreeBSD) that calculates a hash of the file. If the file is changed, even with just the addition of whitespace the hash value will be entirely different. It should be noted here the underlying algo used with md5 is not secure and should not be used for any crypto activities. It works just fine for checking if files have downloaded correctly though.

md5sum is incredibly easy to use, here's an example:

I'm trying to download all the raw reads from the buccal mucosa dataset from hmp and I used wget to do it:

~~~~
wget ftp://public-ftp.hmpdacc.org/Illumina/*
~~~~

and I got 'em all! Well, at least I have the same number of files and they all appear to have data in them. How do I know the complete files got downloaded? Read through the log like a noob? There's an easier way! And one that provides a little more reassurance than "I looked at it."
